- Tim Freke had an awakening at the age of 12,
the kind that one reads about in spiritual tomes.
He spent the rest of his life trying to understand
how all of us can reach this level of connection
with our most primal and refined other part of self.
Known today as a stand-up philosopher and author
of several books including "Lucid Living",
Tim speaks with me about embracing all of our parts
in the journey back to our true selves.
(upbeat lively music)
The journey didn't begin yesterday for you.
For you, as I recall, you were around nine years old
there was something that occurred in your life at that time
that spun you into a new level of contemplation.
I was a little bit older, I was about 12.
12, okay.
And it always seemed strange.
Life has always seemed strange to me, it still does.
Just profoundly mysterious that it is,
this is here, that we don't know what it is,
that we're thrown in to this life.
And even as a kid, well especially perhaps as a kid,
and being surrounded by all these grown-ups
who were walking around as if they knew what life is.
It seemed hysterically funny and also very troubling.
You know, the teachers, my parents, everyone.
No one seemed to be asking the big questions.
It was like they entered into some sort
of mutual conspiracy, whereby everyone had agreed
not to mention the elephant in the room,
and the elephant is nobody knows what this is.
And I used to sit on this hill above this sleepy hometown
where I grew up, just thinking about, "What is life,
"what is suffering, what is death?"
And you were 12?
Twelve, yeah.
And one day something just happened,
where it felt like the top of my head came off
and the sky came pouring in.
It was like I stepped in to a secret garden, something,
just the transformation of consciousness.
And there was this oneness and this love;
that was the thing which I noticed the most
and which made the biggest impression.
Tim was utterly, utterly loved 'cause the universe
was just permeated with love.
And in some way that I couldn't possibly comprehend
I was the love loving Tim
as much as I was Tim being loved.
So you were aware of the larger aspect
of your being, the greater, the finer aspect of your being
even then by knowing that somehow Tim was loving Tim?
I mean, looking back.
Yeah, yeah.
That's what happened.
I mean, something I write about and do a lot with people
was just to come in to the mystery.
Yes.
Just when we step out of the story of who we are
and what life is.
And just become conscious of this breathtaking mystery
of this moment - that it is.
And yet most of us walk right past it.
We don't even see the moments of our lives.
Isn't that interesting, where like we're so unconscious
that we don't even notice the most obvious thing
which is we don't know what this is.
Yeah.
And if we don't notice the most obvious thing,
what else don't we notice?
Right.
And that becomes an exciting thing for me because,
"Okay, well let's explore that.
"Let's dive into the mystery.
"Let's not know for a moment."
Yes, and at the same time what's interesting,
you spoke about this, as though all the adults
seem to know what life was about.
There was this collective agreement
that they somehow knew something
even though those questions
weren't even being asked.
And that just brings to mind one thing
that is kind of interesting because if you take it
to what appears to be the top
of the socioeconomic food chain in the West,
you're looking at say Fortune 500 executives,
that's who people look at on the news and say,
"Oh, now that person knows what's going on.
"Look what they've developed in their lives," right?
It's purely material, but nonetheless.
One of the things I found very interesting
is a number of years ago, there was a survey
that was done with Fortune 500 CEOs
and what was the one thing they fear the most?
The one thing they fear the most is that sooner or later
they were going to be revealed for the fraud
that they truly were.
Isn't that amazing?
And I find that all the time,
I think we're all like that.
Yeah.
'Cause we're all pretending.
We're pretending we know who we are and what this is.
And honestly, I don't think anyone knows what this is.
Not even someone living in a cave in Swami,
Bananarama, or up in the Himalayas.
Nobody knows what this is.
Right.
It is by its nature a mystery.
It is something which is out to know it.
You can't know it as an object.
Yes.
You have to just be one with it to know it.
And that's a change of consciousness, not at set of ideas.
And you really do something,
what drew me to your work which is quite interesting,
you have this wonderful little book,
it's as you say a one-hour read
through consciousness and awareness,
and it's called "Lucid Living".
When you explain this you start with the explanation
of lucid dreaming because this is more something
that people can relate to.
Can we back engineer it, going through the dream state?
Well, what fascinates me is that we enter this state
of dreaming everyday.
And it's pretty strange, this world is old
on a regular basis.
And we accept that as a mystery.
And we just go along with it.
Yeah.
Hey, I'm gonna lie down.
This is gonna go.
I won't be Tim.
Whoa, I'll be catapulted into another world
and different things will happen.
And then I'll disappear altogether
and there'll be this presence in which I am
but I don't know that I am.
And then, hoof, Tim will be back.
And I think nothing of it (laughs).
Isn't it amazing?
We're totally comfortable within
except this bizarre other mysterious element of our lives.
But when we do dream we're lost in it,
we think we are who we appear to be in the dream.
Right.
If you dream lucidly, if you dream consciously,
it puts you in this very interesting place
where you realize you have two natures
or there's a polarity to your nature.
On the one hand you're the person
you used to be in the dream,
but actually you're what, you're the dreamer,
you're the awareness within which
the whole dream is arising.
And there's no separation between what you are
and the whole dream; you are the dream.
You're experiencing it by being one small fragment
of the dream, but you're actually the whole dream.
Now, my exploration of the mystery of the moment
has led me to see that this is the same now.
It's a different arc of the same thing
that life is also like a dream.
It has to be.
And we become lost to them.
We're so unconscious we don't even notice it's mysterious.
But actually become more conscious you recognize here
there's a polarity to your identity.
On the one hand there's the person you appear to be
in this dream, in this flow of colors and shapes and sounds
and then there's what you are; the presence of awareness
within which the whole dream is arising.
This vast spacious emptiness within which everything,
and there's no separation between what we are
and what this is.
So here, you and I are separate individuals
and that's what's so funny.
It's so great.
We're different.
But here, there's one of us, dreaming itself
to be everything and everyone.
And when we meet as one and separate there's this love
that I experienced when I was 12 years old
because love is how oneness feels and you love someone
it's because you're not just separate.
It's this unity.
There's this unity and this feeling of connection
is what we call love.
So for me, ultimately, it's about love.
And that love arises when we're not just lost
in the separateness.
We don't need to reject the separateness,
the dreams are not going anywhere.
I'm still Tim, just a guy.
This little vulnerable spec which would come and go.
I'm attached, I care, I have my family, I'm human
and yet as well there's this vast spaciousness.
And I don't have to reject my humanity
to discover my divinity, if you will.
But did you know that all along,
or is this something that you ultimately
had to mature into the awareness of?
Because it seems like, for a lot of people
the journey has been, they'll have a moment
of lucidity such as yours at 12 which catapults people
on to becoming the nothingness.
And shedding yourself of human characteristics and traits
and attachments and all these sorts of things,
and that seems to be the actual destination
many people aspire to then from that moment.
Yes.
But what happened with you--
It was the same.
For me I've had a very archetypal journey.
I came out and the whole world, whoa,
and I was back here.
Yeah.
And then there's this longing.
"Oh my God, I want that love and oneness again.
"Where can I find it?"
And I played with every form of philosophy in practice
and drugs and everything I could do
to transform consciousness and I found
that it happened again and again,
and I've lose it again and I'd find it again.
And my life was like ooh, ahh, ooh, ahh, ooh, ahh.
And what that can lead to quite naturally is,
"Oh this is the problem.
"Tim is the problem.
"I've got to get rid of this so I can experience this."
And a lot of spirituality teaches that.
Yes.
So that's what I thought I had to do.
How are you impractical if you're still
embodied here though?
What's happened to me now is having made
this convoluted journey through the labyrinth
I feel kinda back to where I was when I started,
only this time I know what it is.
When I was 12 I didn't know what it was.
Now I know what it is, I have a way of understanding
and it just seems natural to me now.
And it's not about getting rid of everything,
it's about noticing something else as well
that there's this polarity, it's not either/or,
it's both/and, that we are this presence, this oneness.
That's a reality.
And to be conscious of it
is the most beautiful thing in the world.
But this isn't going anywhere.
And not only do we not have to get rid of anything,
actually I feel the opposite, this is very precious.
Because the love brings us back in
and that's where we can really engage
with this dream of love.
'Cause it's incredible really.
Actually there's a line in one of the Gnostic Gospels
which I really love, I think it's in the Gospel of Philip,
written along in the Gnostics.
And it says, "Those who are free because of gnosis,"
and it's knowledge, it's knowing you are free,
remember that, liberation it is.
But those who are free because of gnosis
become slaves because of love.
And the love pulls you back in to the world
of this and that, the duality of joy and suffering
so that you can really celebrate the joy
and ameliorate the suffering.
You want to engage with that so that my humanity,
the irony for me is I travel around the world
talking about waking up to oneness,
but what I really want is people to engage
with the separateness.
I know, I was going to bring that up
because I found that ironic.
Because you are speaking at the Science and Nonduality--
I know.
Conference and you say, essentially,
without going into the physics of it all
and the quantum field of it,
you can't even have that recognition unless you are
distinctly dual in nature.
Exactly.
Because you have to have this reflection
to be able to bounce off at the other awareness.
And awareness in itself is unconscious.
Exactly.
That's where we go every night.
Yeah.
That's where we go.
And it's all one, so we don't know what it is.
And people say to me, "Oh Tim, Tim,
"I wanna be one with everything."
And I just go, "Okay, great, go to sleep."
(laughs) Very true.
Because what we want is to be consciously one
with everything.
But to be conscious is to be separate,
that's what arises in the morning.
Separateness.
What happens?
Subject and object, this and that,
this chair, table, this, head, everything gets,
and we're conscious.
But we'd only get lost in the conscious,
in the separateness.
Because that can often lead to a type
of contraction energetically.
Versus in the dream state you go out,
you refresh yourself, your body rejuvenates itself
as you're part of this field of oneness
and play yourself out however you choose,
there are no barriers or boundaries.
You come back in, come crashing, tinglingly crashing back
into the body upon waking in the morning
and then there seems to often be a type of contraction
that occurs after the sleep state.
Yeah, that's when we get lost in the separateness.
When I call this lucid living,
this state-like lucid dreaming,
it's when you got the both act.
Yes.
So the journey, if you like, seems to be
from unconsciousness oneness
through conscious separateness
to conscious oneness.
And conscious oneness is separate
and not separate at the same time.
And also being aware you're the dreamer.
Yeah, so you're aware you're the dreamer
but only through appearance,
be this tiny small fragment called Tim.
Yes, yes.
You mentioned this a moment ago.
You've written books and articles and quite a lot
on as you say the Gnostic wisdoms,
one was as I recall Mystery of Jesus.
Jesus Mysteries.
Also on the Sufi Way.
And so you've studied the various mystical religions--
I must have written on every single major tradition.
Yes.
So there had to have been
an emergent theme for you that came out of all of them.
Can you articulate what started rising
from your vast studies?
I was compelled to investigate them all
because I was looking to understand
what was happening to me.
And what I found was there is really,
there is what get called a perennial philosophy,
and it's that there is fundamentally one of us,
that there is one awareness within
which everything is arising.
And that the recognition of that oneness
is the experience of compassion, of love.
And that's essentially it; it's as simple as that.
And then all these different people,
put it in different languages at different times,
because they're literally speaking different languages
at different times, different cultures.
And that's when it became important to me to say,
"Well how can we say it now
"so that we're not stuck in the past?"
It has been like with music.
If you listen to Beethoven now,
it sounds very conservatory.
People wearing suits, it's so classic with music.
But of course when Beethoven wrote
it was revolutionary, just shocking.
And it happens like that with everything.
So a lot of the spirituality of the past
which was at the time revolutionary
and will wake you up has lost that edge
because it's just been harassed
and we don't understand the words properly anymore,
and it sounds, "Oh."
And so we need to keep reinventing it,
reinventing the way we talk about it.
So my question to philosophers,
"How can I say this so clearly and so simply
"that people go, "Oh my God I've got it."
And my favorite thing, and I have a lot,
it's when people say, "You've just said
"what I've been trying to say."
And that's what I'm experiencing.
And here at this nonduality conference,
coming in and going, "Look guys, we don't wanna,
"let's celebrate the separateness.
"It's not an error.
"It's the foundation from which we can experience
"the oneness."
Has had the most fantastic reception.
It's like a relief, that's my sense.
People were going, "Yeah, that's right.
"That's right."
Oh, people very much resonated
to what you were saying yesterday.
I was in the audience, yes.
We know this.
And the problem is we get a voice inside of us.
When you hear, "Oh get rid of the ego,"
or, "Not be attached," or, "Deny your humanity."
Some voice inside goes, "No, no, no."
And we go, "Oh, that's the enemy.
"That voice, that's my ego, I got to get rid of it."
And it's not, it's wisdom.
That voice which we think is the enemy is actually wisdom
going, "Don't get rid of this, you need this.
"You just want this as well."
Yes.
And we end up fighting ourself.
We end up in a civil war with ourself.
And like all war, civil war is completely pointless.
It leads nowhere.
It is indeed.
And it seems as though what you just said
to even attempt, which is feudal,
to attempt to release that aspect that we call ego,
which I think is a very much misunderstood term
to begin with.
Basically, we need to be ready to let go
of this physical experience at the same time.
Yes.
I mean, it's hand in hand.
That is the accumulation of the,
if you want to call it a total experience
of lifetime after lifetime, is what is indicated
in what we call the ego,
it's our understanding of oneness.
For me, the key idea is polarity,
I've said it a few times, but what is a polarity?
A polarity is opposites which coexist.
Left is the opposite of right.
But you can't have left without right.
They're opposites which coexist.
They're two and one at the same time.
Yes.
And this is two and one at the same time.
And we don't have to prejudice one over the other
because they're the same thing.
In the Buddhist tradition, Samsara is Nirvana,
Nirvana is Samsara, it's the final place you end up.
These are the same thing.
The emptiness is the fullness.
The dreamer is the dream, the dream is the dreamer.
And so nonduality becomes actually both/and
not either/or.
But an awful lot of nonduality gets stuck in either/or.
It's either one or it's not.
Right.
But it's one expressing itself as many
which is both, clearly.
Isn't it?
It's absolutely clear that this is all separate.
But come back here and it's crystal clear
that it's also a one.
So we don't have to choose between these,
and attempting to choose will make life very difficult.
Yes.
Because you spend your whole time trying
to get rid of something you could never get rid of.
So you're constantly striving to arrive
at your own enlightenment that you could never reach.
Rather than just seeing the majesty of our predicament.
There's what we are which is perfect, and expansive,
and loving, and then there's this limited expression
which is vulnerable and poignant and caught in a world
of joy and suffering, beauty and cruelty,
life and death, all of those polarities
and we dance our way through those polarities.
Very true.
And there've been the work of a few people
that come to mind when you're saying that.
This notion that to be in the flesh,
to be in this third degree of density,
I mean I look at it as a multidimensional life experience.
And to be in this third degree density
is the ignorant part, it's the troublesome part
of the whole thing, it's the Tim factor, right?
Or the Regina factor, whomever factor.
Amit Goswami who was also here a couple of days ago,
I think even yesterday, and one of his more recent books,
"Physics of the Soul" is saying, yes, but it's through
this physicality, this third dimensional density
and reality that we can actually begin to apply
and you put into effect the things that we know,
we learn, we feel, we believe and we think.
These other finer densities, these awareness,
are really more fields to potential as it were
but this is where it plays out.
And it's very pleasurable as well, isn't it?
"Oh, it's kinda good here."
If once you can relax into it
and enter into it just to breath is just
the most fabulously pleasurable experience.
It really is.
Just breathing, just looking at a sunrise or a sunset.
However, when you listen to a lot of people;
many, many people that I ran into say,
"I hope this is the last time for me."
I did.
I know, I've never understood that.
Oh I had it, I do.
I had it in my twenties.
I felt so alienated at one point and it was like,
and the world is mad as well as beautiful, isn't it?
I mean, I still feel that.
It's completely crazy, full of mad people
doing mad things.
And you say, "God, get me out of here."
"This is the wrong place."
And the suffering is horrendous.
I hate suffering.
I hate it myself, I hate seeing it in others.
When you see all of that and you just think,
"Get me out of here."
But the irony for me is that what's happened
in my attempt to get out of here
I've fallen in love with love.
See, now that's beautiful.
And I'm wondering if, I don't mean to be divisive
and dualistic in this particular perspective.
But I'm wondering often if that might,
there might be more of a burden
on the male aspect of ourselves
that creates this,
this unique kind of suffering.
I don't hear this often from women saying,
"Oh, I can't wait to get out of here."
Well if you look at it archetypally and of course
you know these are archetypes--
So if we can look at the male/female--
If you look at it archetypally,
I mean, if I go back to the ancient world
where they talked about everything in terms of archetypes:
of god and goddess
then this story which I've been expressing
in the Modern Indian would be there is God
who is the great mystery, the big maj,
the awareness within which everything is arising.
But to know itself, it dreams the dream of life,
and the dream of life is the feminine, it's the goddess.
This is her, everything, every taste,
every form, every thought, everything,
the whole richness, the color, the particularity is her.
It's like God looks in a mirror and sees himself
as his opposite, so the essence becomes the forms.
And what's happened is that we've had a long period
of spirituality being dominated by men
who've gone or get rid of the feminine.
If you wanna get back to the essence
get rid of pleasure, sex, children,
the enjoyment, the forms.
Get rid of this illusion.
And stay as a clean,
pure field of potential, I suppose.
And all of that is archetypally male.
Live up a mansion, in a cave,
or with a whole lot of other guys.
Right.
And what's happened is with science, actually,
which is often seen as a very male thing,
but again archetypally what's happened in science
is that human beings have gone,
you know what let's listen to her,
let's look at the forms, let's ask mother nature
the way she works, let's stop reading about it in a book
and actually see the way it actually is.
So in a way it's a rediscovery of the goddess,
the feminine, and from that come this whole new world
in which now you and I are loving this experience
where we're eating the best.
We've made life much better through doing this.
And now we're in a position, I think, where we're going,
"Do you know what?
"Do we want to get rid of this
"or do we want to be free to be in this?"
And what the awakening does now, I think,
can free us to embrace both the essence,
the male archetype, and the appearance,
the female archetype.
And actually love the appearances.
And what is so beautiful about this big love
is it can embrace the joy and the suffering, both.
It's not likely.
Some of it's likeable, some of it's horrible,
but this love can hold both.
It's big enough to take the heart break
as well as the ecstasy.
So how do you see this
in the context of where we are,
Science and Nonduality?
We're at a Science and Nonduality Conference.
I think what's happening is that,
again it's a polarity.
What I love about scientists is that they're human beings
and very meticulously have gone out into the appearances
and go, "What is this?"
And then they go, "Well it looks like this,
"but what is it really?"
And they've looked really, really closely and go on,
"Hey guys, it's not there.
"It's all just kind of--
Exactly.
that's more what you hear than anything.
If you go into the deep physics of it
in the various lectures we've looked
and it's not there.
Oh it's true.
Most people think science is materialism.
Science has disproved materialism 100 years ago, more.
That's gone.
Right.
Scientists are doing, or physics is at least.
Other scientists are trailing behind a bit
but physics on the cutting edge--
I mean, this really is what's proving out
the very thing that you're speaking about.
So they've done that objectively.
What Gnostics, mystics, explorers of consciousness do
is they go, "Who am I?"
And the scientists go, "What is this?"
And they go, "Who am I?"
And they're coming back into the subject,
"Am I what I think I am?"
"Oh my God no, I'm the whole thing.
"I think nothing's what I thought it was.
"It doesn't really exist."
And you hear the same conclusion from these two
completely opposite perspectives.
Exactly.
And again, if I go back to my studies
in the ancient world, there was a time when these two
were not distinguished; they were the same thing,
the scientists and the Gnostics were the same thing.
What I love, Gnostic is Greek for knower,
and scientist is Latin for knower.
There you go.
They're studying the gnosis, the knowledge;
the science is science, the knowledge.
These are the same things.
And they're really just the two complementary perspectives
on this moment.
And it is encouraging to see
for the first time at this conference in particular,
I think this is the only one I've been to
where it seems to be more male dominant
in the attendees than female.
Ten years ago, 15 years ago,
when these kinds of conferences began
you would see a male head or two in the room,
it was mostly female attendees.
What I love about the stuff I do is,
always, there's equal men and women.
Everything, whether evenings, days, weekends.
And I think it's because we need to address
the head and the heart.
We need the clarity of the thought and that can open up
this experience of oneness and love,
so that we can end up just dissolving
into this love together and going,
"I don't know what's going on, but I love it."
Yeah.
But to arrive there you have to be able to also go,
"No, we don't need," again don't reject the rational mind.
If you don't think you won't be enlightened,
you'll be stupid
Right.
Let's think and feel, let's intuit as well,
let's be all that we are and that seems obvious to me.
Look, we're all of this let's just consciously be
what we are.
There's no one keeping score.
I mean, I think that we all have this sense,
someone's keeping score of our lives on some level.
"Have you done well, Tim?"
"Oh disappointing, disappointing."
A lot of disappointings over there, eh?
Let's talk about the experience of what you do.
Because I've heard you speaking about
how you perceive life.
But when someone comes to a workshop with you for example,
how do you impart the experience?
So you can give just a little taste.
Experience?
What I'm doing is so simple it can sound like nothing.
I was just on a day in San Francisco yesterday,
every single person went through to the Big Love
without exception.
Every person went where?
To the Big Love, to the one oneness
and the Big Love.
And that's not an opinion because it's embodied.
They know it, 'cause it's in you.
You just can't miss it, you feel it
and you feel it with the others there.
And my method is to clarify things as briefly
and as clearly as I can with ideas.
And then to do very simple things,
like I will get people to sit, become conscious
of the moment, the richness of their experience,
really into it, really into it.
See how amazing it is to feel, and think, and listen,
and then to become conscious
of what's witnessing all of that.
And then as you do that you become conscious
of this oceanic presence of awareness.
And then from there, to just open their eyes
and do what we're doing, to just look in the eyes
of another person.
And when you look in somebody eyes you go,
"I can see a beautiful face,
"but I can't see awareness."
I can look through that eye, literally that whole,
and what am I connecting with?
So I am this presence of awareness, this mystery
connecting through the forms
with the presence of awareness.
Yes.
If you're conscious enough as you do that,
suddenly you're one and two at the same time.
And that's awesome.
And you can do that through listening
and through just touching fingers,
and you can do it collectively together
or you can do it with one person
and it's utilizing things we're doing all the time:
we look at people all the time, we listen all the time,
we touch all the time.
But to do it without consciousness
suddenly it wakes you up.
What kind of effects has it had on people,
at least as you've been able to keep tabs
through the years, what kind of lasting effects
does this experience have?
It's been a real privilege now to see people
who have been touching along this with me,
but when I say that don't be misled.
It's not about me.
It's more like what I see with people that I travel with
it's like an explorer's club.
My job is to be like a (mumbles).
I do this, I don't know why I do this, but I do this.
And I know that if I enter deeply into this place
people around me start entering into it too
and that's great.
And that's my role.
There's nothing special about that whatsoever,
it's just my role.
And people do it themselves
when they're exploring themselves,
but as they do it lives are transformed.
I mean, I'm a very lucky person because I get to witness
and I get a lot of appreciation for that
and I appreciate that appreciation
that people's lives can be so profoundly changed.
'Cause there's a place to go where you witness
oneness and love, and that's the only thing
which can fill the hole.
And you don't try to avoid,
as we talked about it a little bit ago,
you don't try to avoid or put a qualitative type of lens
on the experience you have as you said yesterday,
or perhaps the day before now,
you want to feel your heart break.
Yes.
This isn't about not feeling.
Many, many people seem to flee to the world
of metaphysics and spirituality
so that the pain isn't there anymore.
Yes, I mean for me, right now as we're speaking,
my father is dying.
And I very nearly didn't come to this conference.
I made the decision that I would, encouraged by mother.
But he's lying in a bed, he can move his left hand,
nothing else, and he is very distressed,
and he's calling out for help,
and he doesn't know where he is.
Now I don't want to be in the position
where that doesn't move me,
because if that happens I have lost my humanity.
I hate it.
I hate that he's suffering and it makes me suffer.
But the loss would be worse,
because what I don't want is numbness.
I want to feel and be human,
but I don't wanna be overwhelmed by that.
And if I just come into my separateness
it is overwhelming, I can't bear it.
It's too much for me.
Just my father suffering that the knowledge
that he's just one person amongst millions of people
who are suffering right now.
And yet if I come back to that big space
what I am, what we really are,
that can only bear (mumbles).
It's holding all of it within it.
And there's a fundamental okayness
even when it's not okay.
There's poignancy.
I see that this love celebrates when it's good
which you actually appreciate it
which (mumbles) and it brings this poignancy
to when it's terrible.
There is also that love and that meeting,
and it's bittersweet.
And for me to let go of that,
which I thought to not be attached,
what, to not be attached?
But is it either/or, is it a choice,
or can it be both/and?
Here, I'm not attached, never could be, never will be.
Just like in a dream, it's okay, it doesn't matter.
Here it matters.
Is it fair to say then that the
art of lucid living is to be able to expand out
into that oneness awareness,
and to be able, simultaneously, or to at least be able
to easily traverse between the two;
be fully engaged in the human experience?
Yeah, beautiful point, beautiful.
'Cause for me the great paradox is being
the more I come out, the more I can come in.
Because actually, I think we can spend an awful lot
of our lives, I know I have,
being too frightened to come in.
But when there's this knowledge of what the Gnostics
call your unbornness; what we are can't ever die
is never born, the dreamer outside the dream,
then I'm free to enter in, to actually engage
with the richness of the drama,
to play my little part in this vast pageant,
and to be beat him, to try that out.
And more than anything I wanna see us do that
as individuals, to know that who we are,
to find the oneness, experience the love,
and then to really commit to being who we happen to be
and to play some part in waking us up collectively.
To revel in a role, revel in our passions.
Whatever it is.
It can be something which seem small,
it can be just a child.
Yes.
Just.
Yeah, just.
Because it's huge, isn't it?
What could be bigger?
Right.
I mean, when you reach lots and lots of people
through books and film and things like that
you compare to what the effects they have on your child.
It's nothing.
Right.
Ditto, I will say that's true.
So whatever we're doing, I have this thing,
we can be ambassadors for oneness.
There's the state of oneness
and we're an ambassador for it.
Yes.
And if that sounds too grand, being an ambassador,
you can be a secret agent for love.
(laughter)
And no one will know you're doing it,
apart from other secret agents.
You'll go, "You're a secret agent for love, right?"
And there's a lot of those.
Yeah.
We need a lot of those.
Any final thoughts?
(clears throat)
Well, I think the journey is taking me to this place
where I finally, it's been a hard journey,
I really conclusively know that I know nothing.
For a long time I thought I probably knew nothing,
now I know I know nothing and I'm pleased about that.
Is it freeing?
It is.
There is this mystery, and then I have a story,
and we need that.
I have to have that.
If I don't have that I can't live 'cause this is a story.
The most obvious thing about life, isn't it,
the most obvious thing is not that it's made up of atoms,
the most obvious thing is the story.
That's really obvious.
Yes.
It's clearly that.
When you go like, "The universe is atoms,"
it's like looking at a movie and going,
"It's just pixels."
It's like, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, but it's a story
"first and foremost," and this is a story.
And what we bring to the story,
we don't know what those story is,
we bring our story, and we can share it with each other.
And when we can meet in the humility
and the authenticity of going,
"Wow, I don't know what this is.
"This is what I found, what have you found?"
And share it as equal explorers of the mystery.
I love that.
It'd be really grateful to do that with you today.
As have I.
Thank you so much for your time.
I know you're about to bustle off somewhere,
and I really appreciate spending the time with you.
I very much enjoy the chat yesterday,
and that's what drove me to harness you,
well to tackle you (laughs),
to see if we can sit together.
Thank you so much for your time, Tim.
Thank you.
(upbeat lively music)
To connect with Tim and one of his workshops,
you can visit his website at timothyfreke.com,
and that's spelled F-R-E-K-E.
And you can purchase all of his books
at Amazon or other major book sellers.
Meanwhile, another philosopher you might enjoy,
if you're not already familiar with him, is Peter Russell.
We have a couple of interviews with Peter on this site.
Until next time.
Thanks for watching CMN.